This book is organized in the following way. Part I opens with an introductory chapter, Chapter One, in which background assumptions are briefly sketched. In Chapter Two of Part I our major conclusions with respect to phonological theory and the phonology of English are outlined. Also discussed are the possible implications of this work with regard to perceptual processes and the conditions under which knowledge of a language (and, presumably, knowledge of other sorts) can be acquired. Part II of the book is an elaboration of the topics treated in Chapter Two of Part I. Chapters Three and Four examine in considerable detail two aspects of English sound structure which were only sketched in Chapter Two. In the course of this detailed investigation of English sound patterns and their underlying structure, certain rules of English phonology are developed. These rules are restated in Chapter Five, which concludes Part Two. The primary emphasis in Part II is on the phonology of English; theory is developed informally as needed for the exposition and analysis. Part III deals with certain aspects of the historical evolution of the sound patterns revealed in the synchronic study in Part II. Part IV is devoted to phonological theory. The informal discussion in Part I is expanded upon, and the theory presented in an ad hoc manner in Part II is systematically developed. The first chapter of Part IV-Chapter Seven-is concerned with universal phonetics, that is, with the general theory of linguistic representation of speech signals. Chapter Eight deals with the principles of organization of the phonological component of the grammar, that is, with the rules that relate syntactic structures to phonetically represented speech signals. In the ninth and concluding chapter, a proposal is presented for an extension of phonological theory that takes into account the intrinsic content of features. Part IV is not concerned with the structure of English but is intended rather as a contribution to universal grammar. In writing the book we have had two classes of potential readers in mind: first, readers who are concerned only with the general properties of English sound structure, with the consequences of these properties for general linguistic theory, and with the implications of general linguistic theory for other fields; second, readers who are concerned with the detailed development of phonological theory and the theory of English, that is, English grammar.
