The increasing demand for the high fidelity portable devices has laid emphasis on the development of low power and high performance systems. In the next generation processors, the low power design has to be incorporated into fundamental computation units, such as multipliers. The characterization and optimization of such low power multipliers will aid in comparison and choice of multiplier modules in system design. In this paper we performed a comparative analysis of the power, delay, and power delay product (PDP) optimization characteristics of four parallel digital multipliers implemented using low power 10 transistor (10T) adders and conventional CMOS adder cells. In order to achieve optimal power savings at smaller geometry sizes, we proposed a heuristic approach known as hybrid adder models. Multipliers realized using the Static Energy Recovery Full adder (SERF) circuit consumed considerably less power compared to 10T and static CMOS based multipliers for all the configurations studied. Furthermore, the difference between the power consumption of the 10 transistor based multipliers and 28T multipliers is significant at 180 nm, but not at 70 nm. For smaller geometry sizes down to 70 nm, the propagation delay of the multipliers implemented with 10 transistors translates to a better performance measure. Carry-Save Multipliers had better PDP range than the other multipliers for all the three adder sub-module designs. The PDP measure for optimal scaled gate width resulted in a best-case scenario for SERF Wallace tree multiplier as compared to the other three SERF based multipliers. This can be attributed to the fast computational capability of the Wallace Tree multiplier and SERF adder's recovery energy logic saving more power at deep sub-micron sizes. The proposed SERF-10T Hybrid adder model multipliers consumed the least power of all the Hybrid and regular models with no deterioration in performance. Taken together, these results suggest that SERF-10T Hybrid model based multipliers are suited for ultra low power design and fast computation at smaller geometry sizes.